[doc] Refresh the venv introduction documentation, and correct the statement about VIRTUAL_ENV (GH-98350) (#98350)
python/cpython: Doc/library/venv.rst

--------------

.. _venv-def:

The :mod:`venv` module provides support for creating lightweight "virtual
environments" with their own independent set of Python packages installed in
their site directories. A virtual environment is created on top of an existing
Python installation, known as the virtual environment's "base" Python, and may
be optionally isolated from the base's site packages, meaning
that packages installed in the base environment will not be accessible from
the virtual environment.

> A virtual environment is therefore a powerful and convenient concept which

Reviewer: Perhaps insert a blank line here?

Author: Sure thing. Done in [1ba4797](https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/98350/commits/1ba4797ad0149e3e1c27eb6bf0bf5b9d57256ff7)

--------------

> .. _venv-def:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. _venv-def:
.. _venv-intro:
```

Probably worth adding a more conventionally-named ref target label here (as we've added in other modules)

> The :mod:`venv` module provides support for creating lightweight "virtual

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The :mod:`!venv` module supports creating lightweight "virtual environments",
```

* Elide unnecessary wordiness
* Avoid linking module to itself, per convention
* Set off this clause with a comma to match below changes

> environments" with their own independent set of Python packages installed in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
each with their own independent set of Python packages installed in
```

* Clarify "each" here

> their site directories. A virtual environment is created on top of an existing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
their :mod:`site` directories.
A virtual environment is created on top of an existing
```

* Link the `site` module with more information about site directories

Python installation, known as the virtual environment's "base" Python, and may
be optionally isolated from the base's site packages, meaning
that packages installed in the base environment will not be accessible from

> the virtual environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
optionally be isolated from the packages in the base environment,
so only those explicitly installed in the virtual environment are available.
```

* State the same thing more concisely with less repetition
* Use simpler language and avoid delving too deep into implementation details in the high-level summary
* Invert semantics and use "explicitly" to better reflect the motivation for this feature
* Tweak the phrasing for readability

A virtual environment is therefore a powerful and convenient concept which
allows quick, and relatively light-weight, Python environment creation.

> When used from within a virtual environment, common installation tools such as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When used from within a virtual environment, common installation tools such as
```

I suggest just eliding this line. It essentially just repeats the same information (and even most of the wording) that the first sentence states more concretely and specifically with less "puffery", which better fits reference documentation such as this. Therefore, I'm not sure it really benefits readers to include it again.

Also, this implies to me that "virtual environments" are just abstract "concepts", rather than concrete constructs, which seems like it could just be confusing.

setuptools_ and pip_ will install Python packages
into the virtual environment's site directory without needing to be told to do

> so explicitly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`pip`_ will install Python packages into a virtual environment
without needing to be told to do so explicitly.
```

Setuptools is not (nowadays) itself an installation tool and [should never be invoked by users directly](https://blog.ganssle.io/articles/2021/10/setup-py-deprecated.html), it is now merely one build backend invoked by build frontends (e.g. installation tools) like `pip` and others.

Not sure if we want to mention Flit, Hatch, etc. here, but I'd just leave it at pip since pretty much all users using `venv` will be familiar with it, whereas many of the others have their own wrappers for managing venvs.

> See :pep:`405` for more information about Python virtual environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See :pep:`405` for more background on Python virtual environments.
```

Emphasize that the PEP is useful background material, but isn't supposed to be primary living documentation for the future (which should be here).

.. include:: /using/venv-create.inc

Further venv detail

> -------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. _venv-explanation:

How venvs work
--------------
```

I'd suggest a tweak to the title to further emphasize that this is an explanation of the internal implementation, rather than details about learning or using venvs. Also, add an appropriate standard ref target label.

When a virtual environment is running, the attributes :attr:`sys.prefix` and
:attr:`sys.exec_prefix` point to the prefix directory of the virtual
environment, whereas :attr:`sys.base_prefix` and
:attr:`sys.base_exec_prefix` point to the non-virtual environment Python
installation which was used to create the virtual environment (known as the

> virtual environment's base environment). It is sufficient to check

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a Python interpreter is running from a virtual environment,
:data:`sys.prefix` and :data:`sys.exec_prefix`
point to the directories of the virtual environment,
whereas :data:`sys.base_prefix` and :data:`sys.base_exec_prefix`
point to those of the base Python used to create the environment.
It is sufficient to check
```

* Make the phrasing simpler, more concise and less repetitive
* A virtual environment is something that can be "active", but not really "running" itself
* Module-level names use `:data:`, while class attributes use `:attr:`.

Author: I find the term "active" to be confusing - it could be understood that this is only "active" after it has been "activated", which of course is not correct.

I accept that the term running is also not entirely natural. I don't have very strong proposals though. The best I could come up with:

> When Python is running from a virtual environment, ...

Reviewer 2: I can see your concern and that this could be more precise and specific (though "active" is still much more appropriate than "running", given the former is standard—if slightly imprecise—verbiage). The clear solution appears to be simply stating that the Python interpreter in question is running in a virtual environment, just as you and @vsajip have suggested. I've modified my suggestion above accordingly.

``sys.prefix == sys.base_prefix`` to determine if the current interpreter is

> a virtual environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
running from a virtual environment.
```

Clarify that the interpreter isn't _itself_ a virtual environment, but rather runs in one

A virtual environment may be "activated" using a script in the virtual
environment's binary directory. This will prepend the virtual environment's
binary directory to your path, so that running "python" will invoke the virtual
environment's Python interpreter and you can run
installed scripts without having to use their full path. The invocation of the
activation script is platform-specific (``<venv>`` must be replaced by the path

> of the directory containing the virtual environment):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A virtual environment may be "activated" using a script in its binary directory
(``bin`` on POSIX; ``Scripts`` on Windows).
This will prepend that directory to your :envvar:`!PATH`, so that running
:program:`!python` will invoke the environment's Python interpreter
and you can run installed scripts without having to use their full path.
The invocation of the activation script is platform-specific
(:samp:`{<venv>}` must be replaced by the path to the directory
containing the virtual environment):
```

* Clarify explicitly what the "binary directory" resolves to on common platforms
* Avoid repeating "virtual environment" many times
* Use appropriate Sphinx roles and formatting
* Minor tweaks to phrasing

+-------------+-----------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Platform    | Shell           | Command to activate virtual environment |
+=============+=================+=========================================+
| POSIX       | bash/zsh        | $ source <venv>/bin/activate            |
+-------------+-----------------+-----------------------------------------+
|             | fish            | $ source <venv>/bin/activate.fish       |
+-------------+-----------------+-----------------------------------------+
|             | csh/tcsh        | $ source <venv>/bin/activate.csh        |
+-------------+-----------------+-----------------------------------------+
|             | PowerShell Core | $ <venv>/bin/Activate.ps1               |
+-------------+-----------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Windows     | cmd.exe         | C:\\> <venv>\\Scripts\\activate.bat     |
+-------------+-----------------+-----------------------------------------+
|             | PowerShell      | PS C:\\> <venv>\\Scripts\\Activate.ps1  |

> +-------------+-----------------+-----------------------------------------+

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+-------------+------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| Platform    | Shell      | Command to activate virtual environment          |
+=============+============+==================================================+
| POSIX       | bash/zsh   | :samp:`$ source {<venv>}/bin/activate`           |
|             +------------+--------------------------------------------------+
|             | fish       | :samp:`$ source {<venv>}/bin/activate.fish`      |
|             +------------+--------------------------------------------------+
|             | csh/tcsh   | :samp:`$ source {<venv>}/bin/activate.csh`       |
|             +------------+--------------------------------------------------+
|             | PowerShell | :samp:`$ {<venv>}/bin/Activate.ps1`              |
+-------------+------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| Windows     | cmd.exe    | :samp:`C:\\> {<venv>}\\Scripts\\activate.bat`    |
|             +------------+--------------------------------------------------+
|             | PowerShell | :samp:`PS C:\\> {<venv>}\\Scripts\\Activate.ps1` |
+-------------+------------+--------------------------------------------------+
```

* Combine table cells where appropriate
* Use `:samp:` to format commands as literal and highlight placeholders

.. versionadded:: 3.4

>    ``fish`` and ``csh`` activation scripts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :program:`!fish` and :program:`!csh` activation scripts.
```

Use semantically-appropriate syntax

.. versionadded:: 3.8
   PowerShell activation scripts installed under POSIX for PowerShell Core
   support.

You don't specifically *need* to activate an environment, and all scripts
installed in a virtual environment should be runnable without activating it.

> In order to achieve this, scripts installed into virtual environments have

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You don't specifically *need* to activate a virtual environment,
as you can just specify the full path to that environment's
Python interpreter when invoking Python.
Furthermore, all scripts installed in the environment
should be runnable without activating it.

In order to achieve this, scripts installed into virtual environments have
```

* Mention that the environment's Python interpreter can be run directly
* Add paragraph break
* Minor phrasing tweaks

> a "shebang" line which points to the virtual environment's Python interpreter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a "shebang" line which points to the environment's Python interpreter,
i.e. :samp:`#!/{<path-to-venv>}/bin/python`.
```

* Add example shebang
* Avoid repeating "virtual environment" again

This means that the script will run with that interpreter regardless of the

> value of ``PATH``. On Windows, "shebang" line processing is supported if

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
value of :envvar:`!PATH`. On Windows, "shebang" line processing is supported if
```

you have the Python Launcher for Windows installed (this was added to Python

> in 3.3 - see :pep:`397` for more details). Thus, double-clicking an installed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you have the :ref:`launcher` installed. Thus, double-clicking an installed
```

Link to canonical documentation and remove outdated aside

script in a Windows Explorer window should run the script with the correct
interpreter without there needing to be any reference to its virtual

> environment in :envvar:`PATH`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
script in a Windows Explorer window should run it with the correct interpreter
without the environment needing to be activated or on the :envvar:`!PATH`.
```

* Describe the situation more simply/concisely and mention environment activation
* Don't attempt to resolve non-present `envvar` reference that causes a warning
* Avoid repetition

When a virtual environment has been activated, the :envvar:`VIRTUAL_ENV`
environment variable is set to the path of the virtual environment. Since it
is not a requirement to explicitly activate a virtual environment in order
to use it, the :envvar:`VIRTUAL_ENV` environment variable cannot be relied

> upon to determine whether a Python environment is virtual or not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a virtual environment has been activated, the :envvar:`!VIRTUAL_ENV`
environment variable is set to the path of the environment.
Since explicitly activating a virtual environment is not required to use it,
:envvar:`!VIRTUAL_ENV` cannot be relied upon to determine
whether a virtual environment is being used.
```

* Make phrasing a little simpler, more concise and easier to follow
* Reduce repetition
* Don't attempt to resolve non-defined environment variables, producing warnings

   environment in its new location. Otherwise, software installed into the
   environment may not work as expected.

> You can deactivate a virtual environment by typing "deactivate" in your shell.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can deactivate a virtual environment by typing ``deactivate`` in your shell.
```

Use correct formatting

The exact mechanism is platform-specific and is an internal implementation

> detail (typically a script or shell function will be used).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
detail (typically, a script or shell function will be used).
```

Comma helps flow here, IMO

> .. note:: When a virtual environment is active, any options that change the
>    installation path will be ignored from all :mod:`distutils` configuration
>    files to prevent projects being inadvertently installed outside of the
>    virtual environment.
> 
> 
> .. _venv-api:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. _venv-api:
```

Distutils has been officially deprecated since Python 3.10 (the oldest backportable version) and removed in this version, 3.12 (thus the link should not resolve). Furthermore, use of these config files and use of `distutils` as an installer directly has been deprecated for perhaps a decade. Therefore, this should just be removed.

Author: The one thing that would make me hesitate with this one is that it would be good to get these improvements into older Python docs. The ``VIRTUAL_ENV`` environment variable documentation is wrong since Python 3.8 (by a commit that was backported that far 2 years ago).

Reviewer: But that snippet could be left out even in documentation for older Python versions, as it doesn't really add all that much information - for example, it's not clear which options might be meant in

> any options that change the installation path

Reviewer 2: > The one thing that would make me hesitate with this one is that it would be good to get these improvements into older Python docs. 

Right, which is why I mentioned it has been deprecated since the oldest backportable version, Python 3.10, and discouraged for perhaps a decade (never mind "distutils configuration files"—I don't know if I've ever run into any modern mention of anything actually using them these days; I'm involved with a fair bit of packaging stuff and I'd never even heard of them until now). Ergo, this is likely to cause more confusion than anything, if even packaging experts like @vsajip aren't even sure what it is intended to mean. And if worst comes to worse, this one change can always be dropped in a backport (though it seems very unnecessary).

> The `VIRTUAL_ENV` environment variable documentation is wrong since Python 3.8 (by a commit that was backported that far 2 years ago).

I'm not entirely sure what you intend to mean here, sorry.

Author: > I'm not entirely sure what you intend to mean here, sorry.

Simply stating that there is a factually incorrect statement in the documenation relating to ``VIRTUAL_ENV`` environment use (it claims: "This can be used to check if one is running inside a virtual environment.", which is wrong), which it would be great to remove from as many backported versions as possible to avoid incorrect usage in the wild.

Reviewer 2: Ah, gotcha :+1: I was confused and wasn't sure the connection.
